
A solution architect designs the overall system and how different systems integrate across different groups. 

A solution architect defines the expected outcome by working with business stakeholders and providing a clear understanding of the delivery objective on the part of the technical team.

The solution architect connects the dots across the organization and ensures consistency within different teams to avoid any last-minute surprises.

The solution architect engages throughout the project life cycle and also defines monitoring and alerting mechanisms to ensure smooth operations after a product's launch. 

The solution architect also plays an essential role in project management by providing advice regarding resource, cost, and timeline estimation.

Overall, the solution architect gets to engage on a more tactical level compared to the enterprise architect. 

The solution architect becomes engaged in a project from a very early stage, which means they need to design a solution by gauging requirements across groups in an organization.

The solution architect needs to ensure consistency in solution design across system components and requirements

The solution architect is responsible for defining NFR (non functional requirements) across groups and different components since they make sure that the desired usability of a solution is achieved across the board. A good solution architect has the primary responsibility of conveying the importance of NFR and making sure they are implemented as part of solution delivery.

The solution architect needs to make sure both teams are on the same page and that the suggested features are also technically compatible. They mentor and guide the technical team as required and put their perspective into a simple language that everyone can understand.

A solution architect needs to manage architectural constraints carefully and be able to negotiate between them to find an optimal solution.

It is essential for a solution architect to understand all the aspects of every constraint and to be able to identify any resulting risk. They must put risk mitigation plans into place and find a balance between them. Handling any scope creep can help a lot in delivering the project on time.

The solution architect needs to have a breadth and depth of technologies to make the right decision since the chosen technology stack can impact the overall delivery of the product.

A solution architect should be able to choose the technology that not only satisfies current requirements but also scaling for future needs.

Solution architects work on solution design after understanding different aspects of functional requirements, NFRs, solution constraints, and technology selection. In an agile environment, this is an iterative approach where the requirements may change over time and need to accommodate the solution design.

Solution architects are not only responsible for solution design. They also help project managers with resource and cost estimation, defining the project's timeline and milestones, the project's release, and its support plan. The solution architect works through different phases of the solution life cycle, from design to delivery and launch. The solution architect helps the development team overcome obstacles and hurdles by providing expertise and a broad understanding.

Often, organizations choose a less costly option for disaster recovery, but it is essential to do regular testing and make sure the failover is working. The team should put a routine checkpoint in operational excellence to make sure there's business continuity in the event of disaster recovery.

Before starting the solution design process, a solution architect should work alongside a product owner to research users by conducting interviews, and surveys, and gathering feedback on the mock frontend design. You need to understand the user's limitations and empower them with supporting features during application development.

When the product is launched, the team should plan for A/B testing by routing a small portion of user traffic to new features and understanding user reactions. After launch, the application must have a mechanism to collect continuous feedback (by providing a feedback form or by launching customer support) to make the design better.

Interoperability enriches system extensibility, and portability increases the usability of an application. Both are critical attributes of an architecture design and may add additional exponential costs if they're not addressed during solution design. A solution architect needs to carefully consider both aspects as per industry requirements and system dependencies.

The solution architect increases product and platform adoption by spreading the word through public forums. They write blogs about solution implementation and conduct workshops to showcase potential benefits and the use of technology platforms.